IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN (APPELLATE JURISDICTION)

PRESENT: MR. JUSTICE MUSHIR ALAM MR. JUSTICE FAISAL ARAB MR. JUSTICE SAJJAD ALI SHAH

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 42-K OF 2016 &
H.R.C. NO. 36629-S OF 2018
(On appeal against the judgment dated 19.02.2016 passed by the High Court of Sindh, Hyderabad in R.A. No. 272/2011)

Manzoor Hussain and another Application for early hearing filed by Mst. Azra Shamim, respondent No. 2

Khalid Aziz and others

VERSUS

(In CA 42-K/2016)
(In HRC 36629-S/18)
... Appellants
(In CA 42-K/2016)
... Respondents

For the Appellants:

Mr. Abid S. Zuberi, ASC Mr. K.A. Wahab, AOR

For Respondents (1-2): Syed Abdul Waheed, ASC Ms. Lubna Ali d/o Mst. Azra Shamim

On Court's Notice:

Mr. Shoukat Bijoro, Mukhtiarkar, Tando Adam Mr. Umer Farooq, Tapedar
(They appeared subsequently)

Date of Hearing:

07.09.2018

JUDGMENT FAISAL ARAB, J.- The dispute in these proceedings

relates to 56 acres and 28 ghuntas of land situated in Deh and Taluqa

Tando Adam, District Sanghar. A big part of this land was an evacuee

land, which was granted to Shah Azizullah Abbasi and her wife Mst.

Tayyeba Khatoon against their claim. He died on 30.05.1992 and was

survived by his widow Mst. Tayyeba Khatoon, respondent No. 1 (son)

and respondent No. 2 (daughter). On 17.09.2002, Mst. Tayyeba

Khatoon also died. To seek transfer of the land in the revenue record in

their names respondents No. 1 & 2 approached the Mukhtiarkar but

were told that their parents had already sold the property to

respondents No. 3 and 4 who thereafter sold the property to the

appellants. This led respondents No. 1 and 2 to file a suit before the

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 42-K OF 2016 &

2

H.R.C. NO. 36629-S OF 2018

Senior Civil Judge, Tando Adam for declaration, permanent injunction, cancellation of documents, possession and mesne profits. The suit was decreed vide judgment dated 30.04.2010. It was held that the appellants have failed to establish that the parents of the respondents No. 1 & 2 have sold the land to respondent No. 3 & 4. The appellants then filed an appeal before the Additional District Judge, Tando Adam, which was allowed vide judgment dated 24.09.2011 and the judgment of the Trial Court was reversed. Aggrieved by such decision, the respondents No. 1 & 2 filed a Revision Application before the High Court, which was allowed, the judgment of the Appellate Court was set aside and that of the Trial Court restored. While allowing the revision application, the learned High Court held that the appellants have failed to prove that the land is question was sold to respondent No. 3 & 4 by the deceased owners; that no document of sale transaction with the deceased was placed on record; no witness of the sale transaction appeared in Court and even the revenue officials, who allegedly attested such entries, were not examined as witnesses. This decision has been challenged in this appeal.

2.

Learned counsel for the appellants inter alia submitted

that the judgment of the High Court is entirely based on misreading

and non-reading of evidence as there was no material to hold that the

revenue record was tampered. It was also argued that the suit filed by

the respondents was barred by time.

3.

Learned counsel for respondent No. 1 & 2 in rebuttal

contended that it was for the appellants to prove that the sale

transactions had taken place between their parents and respondents

No. 3 & 4 but they failed as neither any document as to payment of

sale consideration was produced nor the witnesses of sale transactions

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 42-K OF 2016 &

3

H.R.C. NO. 36629-S OF 2018

or the officials before whom the alleged sale took place were examined by the appellants and that the entire claim of the appellants was solely based on the revenue entries, which are fraudulent.

4.

Apart from examining the record, we out of abandoned

caution summoned the revenue record and upon examining it found

that Shah Azizullah sold 3-39 acres of land bearing survey No. 483/3,

through registered sale deed dated 25.05.1987 to one Abdul Sattar

which is not subject matter of present proceedings and yet we are

surprised to note that the disputed sale transactions made in 1986 and

1987 are based merely on oral statements purportedly made by Shah

Azizullah and her wife before the revenue authorities and allegedly

witnessed by persons namely Furqan son of Gul Muhammad Mirani,

Noor Muhammad Sheikh son of Ladhu Khan Sheikh, Sher Muhammad

son of Babu Khan Bhatti and Muhammad Yaqoob son of Qaiser Junejo

none of whom are from the side of the parents of respondents No. 1 &

2. Additionally, the disputed statements neither contains their CNIC

numbers nor their addresses, only their purported thumb impressions,

which show that they were also illiterate. Although the CNIC numbers

would have helped in confirming that these witnesses actually affixed

their thumb impressions on the revenue record but due to the absence

of the CNIC numbers, it could not be verified from NADRA's database.

In any case, as none of the witnesses of the disputed statements were

examined in Court, it is sufficient to hold that the transaction of sale

has not been proved. Additionally, from the examination of the register

of village Forms VII, the page that contains one of the two disputed

transfer entries is numbered as `58'. The font of the page number `58' is

quite bigger than the page numbers on the remaining pages of the

same register; that the imprint of page number `58' is also much darker

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 42-K OF 2016 &

4

H.R.C. NO. 36629-S OF 2018

than the imprint of the rest of the page numbers of the same register. We may mention here that when pages of a register are numbered with a numbering machine, it is not possible that the size of numbers on pages would be different. Even the impression of ink on a particular page of a register would be the same in comparison to previous and subsequent pages. Either the impression would be light or darker but in the present case the impression on page No. `58' is much pronounced i.e. it is darker than the impression of page numbers on the earlier and subsequent pages. This page also appears to have been subsequently inserted in the register as it is taped from the spine. All this further leads us to draw inference that page number `58' was not part of the same register but has been subsequently inserted with the intention to show a back dated transaction in order to defeat the plea of limitation in case the matter is taken to Court.

5.

With regard to the disputed sale transaction of 20-34 acres

allegedly entered into with Mst. Tayyeba Khatoon, it was pleaded that

she being resident of Karachi came to Tando Adam with her relative to

record her oral statement for transferring the land. Interestingly,

relative was not made a witness in the purported statement. Then the

alleged witnesses of the disputed statement were also not examined in

court. Their CNIC numbers too have not been recorded nor have their

addresses been given. Even the CNIC number of Mst. Tayyeba Khatoon

is not mentioned in the statement. This second sale transaction also

could not be proved. Let a copy of this judgment be sent to the

Member, Board of Revenue so that appropriate disciplinary action shall

be taken against such officials of the revenue department who have

manipulated the relevant revenue record. In case any of them has

retired, criminal action may be initiated.

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 42-K OF 2016 &

5

H.R.C. NO. 36629-S OF 2018

6.

In view of what has been stated above, we find no

exception to the conclusions drawn by the learned Single Judge of the

High Court in its well reasoned judgment, therefore, we do not find any

merit in this appeal, which is accordingly dismissed with no order as to

costs.

H.R.C. NO. 36629-S OF 2018

7.

Since, judgment is being rendered on merits in this appeal

the above referred HRC for early hearing of the said appeal has become

infructuous and is disposed of accordingly.

Announced on 22.11.2018 in Islamabad.
Approved For Reporting
Khurram

JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE

