IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN (ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)

PRESENT
Mr. Justice Nazim Hussain Siddiqui, C.J. Mr. Justice Javed Iqbal Mr. Justice Tassadduq Hussain Jillani

CONSTITUTION PETITIONS No.23 OF 1999 & 21 OF 2004 CMA NO. 1466/2001

Ch. Muhammad Siddique and 2 others .... PETITIONERS

VERSUS

Government of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice Division, Islamabad and 2 others

....

RESPONDENTS

(Const.P.No.23/99)

Government of Punjab through Secretary, Law, Justice & Parliamentary Department, Lahore & another

....

RESPONDENTS

(Const.P.No.21/2004)

For the petitioners:
For the respondents: (Const.P.23/99)
For the respondents: (Const.P.21/04)

Mr. Maqbool Elahi Malik, Sr.ASC Mr. Khalil Ahmed ASC Mr. M.A. Zaidi, AOR Sh. Masood Akhtar, AOR (absent)
Raja Muhammad Irshad Deputy Attorney General Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR.
Syed Shabbar Raza Rizvi Advocate General Punjab Ms Afshan Ghazanfar Assistant Advocate General
Dr. Qazi Khalid Ali Additional Advocate General Sindh
Mr. Jehanzeb Rahim Advocate General NWFP

Const.P.23/99

2

& 21/2004

Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR/ASC on behalf of Advocate General, Balochistan

Applicant: (CMA 1466/2001)

Mr. Muhammad Hanif Abbasi (in person)

Dates of hearing:

23 & 24.9.2004

JUDGMENT

NAZIM HUSSAIN SIDDIQUI, C.J. ­

The

above

petitions have been filed under Article 184(3) of the Constitution

of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973.

2.

In Petition No. 23/1999, petitioners have challenged

the vires of the Marriage Functions (Prohibition of Ostentatious

Displays and Wasteful Expenses) Ordinance, 2000 (Ordinance

No. II of 2000), hereinafter referred to as the Ordinance No. II of

2000, whereby restriction on wasteful expenses on the occasion

of marriage ceremonies has been imposed.

3.

In Petition No. 21/2004, petitioners have challenged

the vires of the Punjab Marriage Functions (Prohibition of

Ostentatious Displays and Wasteful Expenses) Act, 2003 (Act No.

V of 2003), hereinafter referred to as the Act No. V of 2003,

limiting the number of invitees to 300 and placing restriction of

one dish food only thereunder.

4.

Mr. Muhammad Hanif Abbasi through C.M.A. No.

1466/2001 in Petition No. 23/1999 prayed to be added as a

party. The same is allowed and he is added as a respondent in

Petition No. 23/1999.

Const.P.23/99

3

& 21/2004

5.

Prior to the Ordinance No. II of 2000, the Marriage

(Prohibition of Wasteful Expenses) Ordinance, 1997 (Ordinance

No.XLVIII/1997) was promulgated by the Federal Government

whereby restriction on wasteful expenses on the occasion of

marriage ceremonies was imposed for a period of two years. Later

on this Ordinance was enacted by the Parliament as the

Marriages (Prohibition of Wasteful Expenses) Act, 1997 (Act No.

XXI of 1997), which expired on 15.3.1999 in terms of section 1

(3) ibid. On 17.4.1999, the Marriage Functions (Ostentatious

Displays) Ordinance, 1999 (Ordinance No. III of 1999) was

promulgated and the restriction on wasteful expenses was re-

imposed for a period of two years. Petitioners challenged the vires

of the Ordinance No. III of 1999 by filing Constitution Petition No.

23/1999 in this Court. Since the Ordinance No. III of 1999 was

not laid before the National Assembly as envisaged by Article 89

of the Constitution, it stood repealed on expiry of four months.

On 13.1.2000 the Ordinance No. II of 2000 was promulgated,

which holds the field and is applicable throughout Pakistan.

Accordingly, petitioners filed an amended petition in this behalf.

6.

Sections 4 and 5 of the Ordinance No. II of 2000 are

subject matter of Petition No. 23/1999, which are produced

below for ready reference: -

"Section 4:

Restriction on Wasteful

Expenses. ­ (1) No person celebrating his or

the marriage of any other person shall serve or

allow any one to serve meals or other edibles to

persons participating in the marriage in a club,

Const.P.23/99

4

& 21/2004

hotel, restaurant, wedding hall, community centre or any other place except hot and cold soft drinks. (2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to the eating of meals within the house by the members of the family celebrating the marriage or the house guests.

Section 5: Application of the Ordinance to hotels, restaurants, etc. ­ No person owning or running a hotel, restaurant, wedding hall, community centre or club being the site of marriage ceremony or any caterer shall serve or allow anyone to serve any meals or edibles to the persons participating in the marriage ceremony other than hot and cold soft drinks." (underlined for emphasis)

7.

On 14.2.2003, the Punjab Marriage Functions

(Prohibition of Ostentatious Displays and Wasteful Expenses)

Act, 2003 was passed by the Provincial Assembly and its sections

4 and 5, which have been challenged in Petition No. 21/2004,

are as follows: -

"4. Restriction on wasteful expenses. ­ (1) No person celebrating his marriage or the marriage of any other person shall serve or allow anyone to serve meals or other edibles to the person in connection with a marriage in a club, hotel, restaurant, wedding hall, community centre, community park or any other place, except soup or, hot or cold soft drinks:

Const.P.23/99

5

& 21/2004

Provided that one dish may be served at the Walima ceremony to a maximum number of three hundred invitees, including hosts, attending the ceremony: (underlined for emphasis)
Provided further that in case the number of invitees, including hosts, attending the Walima ceremony exceeds three hundred, no meal shall be served except soup or, hot or cold soft drinks.
(2) Nothing contained in subsection (1) shall apply to the eating of meals within the house by the members of family celebrating the marriage, and the house guests.

"5. Application of the Act to hotels, restaurants, etc. ­ No person owning or running a hotel, restaurant, wedding hall, community centre, or club being the site of marriage ceremony or any caterer shall serve or allow anyone to serve any means or edibles to the persons participating in the marriage ceremony except as provided in section 4."

8.

It is asserted by Mr.Maqbool Elahi Malik, ASC that

petitioners are law abiding citizens and believe in supremacy of

the Injunctions of Islam. He contended that the Ordinance No. II

of 2000 as well as the Act No. V of 2003 are beyond the

legislative competency of the respective legislatures as they are

against an express Sunnah of the Holy Prophet (may peace be

upon him). He argued that the celebration of Walima being

Sunnah of the Holy Prophet (may peace be upon him) is

Const.P.23/99

6

& 21/2004

obligatory in nature and no restriction could be imposed thereon. According to him, the money spent on such function does not fall within the scope of "Asraaf". He submitted that right from the beginning all the laws on the subject including the Ordinance No. II of 2000 were never implemented, as such, there was no need to make such laws. It is urged that Walima according to some Ahadith continued for 7 days and the perusal of yet other Ahadith reveals that while celebrating Walima, there shall be an element of festivity, good meals and exchange of gifts, etc. He contended that restricting the meals to one dish and limiting the number of invitees to 300 under the Act No. V of 2003 are against Sunnah of the Holy Prophet as he had never, directly or indirectly, imposed any condition on its celebration. It is also contended that these laws directly affect the business of marriage halls, caterers, tent service, light decoration, cooks, waiters and indirectly affect the business of power looms, tent makers, screen printers, chair makers, steel crockery, pipe, carpet, Daris, etc. and are hit by Articles 18 and 25 of the Constitution. He referred, inter alia, to the following Ahadith: -
"The Holy Prophet (PBUH) said: "Give a wedding banquet, even though with one sheep." (AlBokhari & Muslim with reference to Mishkat Hadith 3 : 56).
"The Holy Prophet (PBUH) offered a wedding banquet on the occasion of his marriage with Zainab and offered a good meal to the Muslims".

Const.P.23/99

7

& 21/2004

(Narrated by Anas: Sahih Al-Bokhari ­ Hadith : 84).

"The Holy Prophet (PBUH) said, "set the captives

free, accept the invitation (to a wedding

banquet), and visit the patients." (Narrated by

Abu Musa ­ Hadith : 103)"

9.

Raja Muhammad Irshad, learned Deputy Attorney

General while controverting the above pleas, contended that a

law on the subject has been enacted to curb/discourage wasteful

expenses and that what in fact is prohibited is the wasteful

expenses as these types of expenditure are widening economic

disparity. According to him, Walima is only "Mubah", i.e. a

permitted act and not obligatory. He submitted that this is also

the opinion of the Islamic Ideological Council. He maintains that

such wasteful expenses create frustration and disappointment

among the masses as more than 90 per cent of the population of

the country cannot afford huge expenses in this regard with the

result that the poor parents of girls are exposed to financial

disasters. Further, many social vices are cropping up due to the

financial problems resulting from lavish expenditures on the

occasion of marriage. In support of his contentions, he cited

various Ahadith.

10.

Syed Shabbar Raza Rizvi, learned Advocate General

Punjab submitted that the provincial legislation on the subject

(Act No. V of 2003) is not in conflict with the Ordinance No. II of

2000. It is in the nature of slight improvement, in that, one dish

meals have been allowed to be served to a limited number of

Const.P.23/99

8

& 21/2004

guests in line with the Ahadith of the Holy Prophet according to

which Walima meals were served to the invitees in groups of 10.

He submitted that the provincial law also envisages total

prohibition on serving of meals at the public places. He candidly

stated that in case of repugnancy, the federal law will prevail and

the provincial law to the extent of repugnancy, be void in terms of

Article 143 of the Constitution. He, however, contended that the

federal law did not fix the number of guests, therefore, there was

no inconsistency.

11.

The learned Advocate General submitted that

Constitution petition No. 23 was filed in 1999, which was heard

and decided on 9.11.2002, but there is no judgment on the

record of the case. He also submitted that the vires of the

legislation made by the Federal Government on the subject in

1997 came up for consideration before the Lahore High Court in

Iftikhar v. Province of Punjab (1998 CLC 1508) but the writ

petition was dismissed as not maintainable. The judgment of the

High Court attained finality as no appeal was filed against it. The

present petitions were filed under Article 184(3) of the

Constitution, which can only be entertained if a question of

public importance with reference to the enforcement of any of the

Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II is involved.

No member of the public challenged this law, which means that

no one is aggrieved. It is only few contractors who have come to

this Court. These petitions, therefore, are not entertainable. He

Const.P.23/99

9

& 21/2004

submitted that the Government can be directed to ensure

implementation of the law.

12.

Dr. Qazi Khalid Ali, Additional Advocate General,

Sindh and Raja Abdul Ghafoor, learned ASC/AOR appearing on

behalf of the Advocate General Balochistan have adopted the

arguments of the Advocate General Punjab.

13.

Mr. Jehanzeb Rahim, learned Advocate General,

NWFP submitted that in view of the Ahadith quoted by learned

Deputy Attorney General and learned Advocate General, Punjab,

there is a consensus that while celebrating Nikah/marriage,

avoidance of "Asraaf" and "Tabzeer" should be the principal

guiding factors. He further submitted that the Ordinance has

been challenged on two scores, viz. (a) it is against the Holy

Quran and the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet and (b) it militates

against Articles 18 and 25 of the Constitution. He submitted that

under Article 227 read with Article 203D of the Constitution, the

jurisdiction to declare any law against the Injunctions of Islam is

vested in the Federal Shariat Court and the judgment of that

Court is binding on the High Courts while this Court sits in

appeal against the judgment of the Federal Shariat Court. He

further submitted that the Council of Islamic Ideology examined

this law and opined that the restrictions contained in it are in

accordance with the Holy Quran and Sunnah. He also submitted

that the case law laid down by this Court consistently postulates

that the Courts while interpreting provisions of any law must

lean in favour of its constitutionality. He contended that this

Const.P.23/99

10

& 21/2004

Court does not have the power under Article 184(3) of the

Constitution to strike down a law on the ground that it is against

the Injunctions of Islam. He contended that Article 25 is not

attracted as the petitioners have not shown that some of the

marriage halls are permitted to serve meals but others are not so

permitted. To the contrary, the restriction applies to all the

marriage halls and hotels alike. Further, the restriction is within

the parameters of Article 18, which permits the State to make

law aimed at regulating trade, etc. The restriction has been

imposed in the public interest and is not unreasonable.

14.

Mr. Muhammad Hanif Abbasi, applicant in CMA

No.1466/2001, submitted that for a long time he remained

associated with the business of marriage hall and after having

realized that it was absolutely against Shari'ah, he gave up the

said business and that on the basis of his personal experience,

he has no hesitation to say that at public places in line with the

spirit of the Ordinance No. II of 2000, such functions be

prohibited and the Ordinance No. II of 2000 be implemented in

letter and spirit. He submitted that the impugned legislation is in

consonance with the Injunctions of Shari'ah and by their

implementation, no Shari'ah law is violated.

15.

Both learned Advocate General Punjab and Advocate

General NWFP challenged the maintainability of these petitions

on the ground that original jurisdiction of this Court under

Article 184(3) of the Constitution could not be invoked. Under

what circumstances, said Article can be invoked, recently we

Const.P.23/99

11

& 21/2004

have laid down law on this subject in the case reported as Mian
Muhammad Shahbaz Sharif v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2004
SC 583) and the relevant discussion is in paras 16, 17, 18 and
19 of the judgment, which are as follows: -
"16. Clause (3) of Article 184 and sub-clause
(c) of clause (1) of Article 199 of the
Constitution are for the enforcement of any of
the fundamental rights conferred by Chapter 1
of Part II. For their proper appreciation, they
are reproduced below: -
"Article 184(3): Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 199, the Supreme Court shall, if it considers that a question of public importance with reference to the enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II is involved, have the power to make an order of the nature mentioned in the said Article."
"Article 199(1): Subject to the Constitution, a High Court may, if it is satisfied that no other adequate remedy is provided by law, - - - (c) on the application of any aggrieved person, make an order giving such directions to any person or authority, including any Government exercising any power or performing any function in, or in relation to, any territory within the jurisdiction of that Court as may be appropriate for the enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II."
17. Articles 199 and 184(3) regulate the
jurisdiction of the Superior Courts and do not
oust it. Perusal of clause (3) of Article 184
unequivocally postulates that two conditions
are precedent for invoking said clause. Firstly,
the petition must clearly demonstrate that the

Const.P.23/99

12

& 21/2004

grievance relates to violation of fundamental rights. Secondly, the violation is of nature of public importance, which has been interpreted to mean any invasion of individual freedom, liberty, fundamental rights, including effectiveness and safeguard for their implementation. Therefore, having regard to the connotation of the words "public importance", the facts and circumstances of each case would have to be scrutinized on its own merits. 18. With the assistance of learned counsel for the parties, we have surveyed the relevant case law. In Manzoor Elahi's case, (PLD 1975 SC 66), Benazir Bhutto's case (PLD 1988 SC 416), Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif's case (PLD 1993 SC 473), Wasey Zafar's case (PLD 1994 SC 621), I.A. Sharwani's case (1991 SCMR 1041) and the Employees of Pakistan Law Commission's v. Ministry of Works (1994 SCMR 1548), questions of general public importance, which affected the people at large, were involved. In Asad Ali's case (PLD 1998 SC 161), the Supreme Court entertained petition directly for the reason that the issue affected the judicial system of the country. The finding and conclusion of the Supreme Court in Syed Zulfiqar Mehdi v. Pakistan International Airlines Corporation (1998 SCMR 793) have never been deviated from. It is advantageous to quote the relevant observation occurring at page 801 of the report, which reads as under: -
"The issues arising in a case, cannot be considered as a question of public importance, if the decision of the issues affects only the rights of an individual or a group of individuals.

Const.P.23/99

13

& 21/2004

The issue in order to assume the character of public importance must be such that its decision affects the rights and liberties of people at large. The adjective `public' necessarily implies a thing belonging to people at large, the nation, the State or a community as a whole. Therefore, if a controversy is raised in which only a particular group of people is interested and the body of the people as a whole or the entire community has no interest, it cannot be treated as a case of public importance."

19. Same view has recently been taken in

Watan Party's case (PLD 2003 SC 74). It was a

5 ­ member Bench judgment to which one of us

(Nazim Hussain Siddiqui, now Chief Justice)

was a party, wherein reliance was placed on

Manzoor Elahi's case and the above view was

endorsed. For facility of reference, the relevant

observations in the latter case are reproduced

below: -

"Now, what is meant by a question of

public importance. The term `public' is

invariably

employed

in

contradistinction to the terms private

or individual, and connotes, as an

adjective, something pertaining to, or

belonging to the people, relating to a

nation, State or community..."

"The learned Attorney-General is clearly right in saying that a case does not involve a question of public importance merely because it concerns the arrest and detention of an important person like a Member of Parliament. In order to acquire public importance, the case must obviously raise a question, which is of interest to, or affects the whole body of people or an entire community."

Const.P.23/99

14

& 21/2004

Although the Supreme Court thereafter in a number of cases, such as Amanullah Khan v. Chairman, Medical Research Council (1995 SCMR 202) and Mrs. Shahida Zahir Abbasi v. President of Pakistan (PLD 1996 SC 632) has taken a different view, yet the cases under Article 184(3) have been brought within the parameters of the observations referred to above."

Petitioners have alleged violation of fundamental rights

guaranteed under Articles 18 and 25 of the Constitution. The

questions raised in these petitions are of great public

importance, which involve interpretation of various provisions of

the Constitution. The decision of this Court, one way or the

other, will directly affect the entire population of the country. We,

therefore, hold that the petitions are maintainable.

16.

On the second day of hearing of these matters, viz.

24.9.2004, Mr. Maqbool Elahi Malik, learned counsel for the

petitioners made a request to withdraw both these petitions,

which was vehemently opposed by learned Deputy Attorney

General on the ground that the petitioners themselves are

convinced after hearing arguments on 23.9.2004 that their

petitions could not succeed, as such as a last resort, they wanted

to save the Act No. V of 2003 promulgated by the Punjab

Provincial Assembly. Request of learned counsel could not be

allowed as questions of great public importance have been raised

in these petitions, which require authoritative pronouncement by

this Court. Furthermore, question of inconsistency of a provincial

Const.P.23/99

15

& 21/2004

law (the Act No. V of 2003) with a federal law (the Ordinance No.

II of 2000), in view of Article 143 of the Constitution, has

surfaced, which is to be gone into.

17.

The thrust of the arguments of learned counsel for

the petitioners was that holding of Walima being Sunnah of the

Holy Prophet (may peace be upon him) is obligatory in nature.

Since the impugned legislation has been passed against the

Sunnah of the Holy Prophet (may peace be upon him), the same

is liable to be struck down.

18.

Perusal of various Ahadith quoted by the learned

counsel appearing in these petitions and many such others

unambiguously reveals that Walima is a feast arranged on the

occasion of marriage. It comes from the root (

) meaning to

join together. This is so called as it is held on the occasion of

joining of wife and husband together. Majority of the jurists hold

that it is a Sunnah while a few hold that it is Mustahab

(commendable) and a few others are of the view that it is Wajeb

(compulsory). The feast invariably is given by the husband.

19.

Anas bin Malik reported that `Abd al-Rehman b. `Auf

came to the Apostle of Allah (may peace be upon him) and he had

yellow stains on him. The Apostle of Allah (may peace be upon

him) asked him what that was. He said, he had married an

Ansari woman. The Apostle of Allah (may peace be upon him)

asked: "How much have you paid as mahr to her? He said: "Gold

equal to the date seed. Thereafter the Apostle of Allah (may peace

be upon him) said: Perform Walima even if it be of one sheep.

Const.P.23/99

16

& 21/2004

Yahya b. Sa'id reported that the Apostle of Allah (may peace be upon him) used to perform Walima and there would be neither bread nor meat. Ibn Shihab reported al-A'raj to have said that Abu Huraira narrated that that Walima was the worst of meals to which the rich are invited and the poor are ignored. Anas b. Malik reported: A tailor prepared some food and invited the Apostle of Allah (may peace be upon him). Anas said: I too went with the Apostle of Allah (may peace be upon him) to participate in the food. The tailor put before him barley bread and pumpkin curry. Anas said: I saw the Apostle of Allah (may peace be upon him) seeking out from the dish pieces of pumpkin and eating them. From that day pumpkin had become my favourite. Anas also reported: On the occasion of wedding feast of Prophet with Safiya, there was no bread or meat, and dates, dried curt and clarified butter were offered. Safiya daughter of Shaiba said the Prophet held a wedding-feast for one of his wives with two mudds [1 Mudd = ¾ of a kilogram] of barley. Abu Mas'ud al-Ansari said: One of the Ansar whose Kunya was Abu Shu'aib had a servant who sold meat. He said, "Prepare for me food, which will be enough for five; perhaps I shall invite the Prophet along with four others." He prepared a small meal for him, and then he went and invited him. A man followed them, and the Prophet said, "A man has followed us, Abu Shu'aib, so if you wish you may let him join us, but if you wish you may leave him outside." He replied, "No, I shall let him join us." Anas said the Prophet held a wedding-feast for Safiya with meal and dates.

Const.P.23/99

17

& 21/2004

20.

It may be observed that Walima is an invitation to

meals given by the bridegroom intended basically to make the

factum of marriage known to the people of the locality lest there

is any doubt about the new relationship between a man and a

woman. The Walima given by the Holy Prophet (PBUH) on the

eve of his marriage with Zainab referred to above consisted of one

sheep and it was taken by the people as a big feast. On the eve

of his marriages with Safiya and Umm-e-Salama, the Holy

Prophet (PBUH) had offered a small quantity (two seers) of jau,

halais ­ a sweat made of cheese, butter and sugar, or dates. On

one such occasion the Holy Prophet (PBUH) had asked Anas to

go into the street and call the people to the meals in the house of

the Prophet. The following principles are deducible from the

above discussion: -

· Walima invitation is a pre-Islamic concept liked and adopted by the Holy Prophet (PBUH);
· Only such items be given in Walima as the person celebrating Walima can afford from his own resources;
· The invitation of Walima should be offered to all and sundry in the vicinity and should not be confined to relatives, friends, influentials, etc.

21.

The Walima and other marriage functions prevalent in

our society had been made a source of ostentatious display of

wealth inasmuch as the wealthy people spent huge moneys on

the occasion of Baraat, Walima and other functions. This has

taken the form of Asraaf (extravagance), which is strictly

prohibited in the Holy Quran. The Holy Quran says: -

Const.P.23/99

18

& 21/2004

22.

We have also gone through the research note placed on record,

which was submitted before the Islamic Ideological Council in respect of Walima.

It concludes that such functions shall be free from "Asraaf" and "Tabzeer" and

such functions shall also be free from such actions and deeds, which are

prohibited in Islam and may lead towards un-Islamic actions and deeds. No doubt,

Walima is a Sunnah, but always it shall be within limits as narrated in various

Ahadith quoted above. Extravagance i.e. ostentatious and wasteful expenditures on

the occasion of Walima are always discouraged right from the very beginning. By

enormous expenditure of above nature, social vices are created leaving behind

horrifying consequences. These evils have generated social inequalities in the

society.

23.

It is significant to note that right from 1953 till 1978

various legislative instruments were promulgated in order to

overcome these problems. Some of them are: -

1) Economy of Food (Control) Order, 1953; 2) Meals in Establishments Control Order, 1953; 3) Foodstuffs (Regulation of Consumption) Order,
1958; 4) West Pakistan Economy of Food Order, 1958;

Const.P.23/99

19

& 21/2004

5) West Pakistan Economy of Food Order, 1966; 6) Punjab Economy of Food Order, 1972 and 7) Punjab Economy of Food Order, 1975.

The Order of 1953 provided that on the occasion of marriage,

death or any other ceremony or function, no person acting as

host shall distribute, serve or offer or cause to be distributed,

served or offered any edible to more than 25 persons at one meal.

Likewise, other Orders from serial No. 2 to 7 were promulgated

for exercising economy relating to food. The Ordinance No. II of

2000 is in continuation thereof.

24.

The statement of objects and purposes of the

impugned legislation as mentioned in the Preamble to the

Ordinance No. II of 2000 reads as under: -

"Whereas it is expedient to provide for the prohibition of ostentatious displays and wasteful expenses on marriages and ceremonies related thereto."

As far as ostentatious displays are concerned, the Ordinance

provides prohibition on decoration of the venue of marriage with

lights or illumination, etc. The provision in the Ordinance

governing this aspect of the matter is found in section 3 thereof,

which reads as under: -

"Section 3.

Prohibition of ostentatious

celebrations. ­ (1) Subject to sub-section (2), no

person celebrating his marriage or the marriage of

any other person shall ­

(a) decorate or cause to be decorated any house or building including any space appertaining thereto, street,

Const.P.23/99

20

& 21/2004

road or other place, whether owned by him or otherwise, with lights or illumination; (b) explode or allow anyone to explode cracker or other explosive device including firing by firearm; or (c) display or allow any one to display fireworks.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall
prohibit the use of such lights as are ordinarily
necessary to lit the house or any other place being
the site of marriage."

25.

Sections 4 and 5 of the Ordinance No. II of 2000

provide for hot and/or cold soft drinks. Learned counsel for the

petitioners vehemently argued that the Ordinance No. II of 2000

has imposed a ban on holding of Walima. It is not correct. This

law never prohibited holding of Walima. People are at liberty to

celebrate marriage and Walima. What is prohibited is

extravagance and ostentatious display of wealth. This is quite in

line with the teachings of Islam. Islam lays great emphasis on

simple way of life. It is the duty of the State to take steps to

encourage the celebration of marriage ceremonies in simple and

informal ways, such as performance of Nikah in the mosque of

the locality so that the element of inconvenience/harm is

eliminated from the society.

26.

In our view, the Ordinance No. II of 2000 has been

framed with the noble object of prohibiting extravagance and

ostentatious displays on the marriage functions. It is an

important step to prepare the society as a whole for a change in

its behaviour towards this issue and thereby curb the tendency

Const.P.23/99

21

& 21/2004

of wasteful expenses so as to relieve the poorer segments of the

society of the undue burden of exorbitant expenditures incurred

on these occasions.

27.

The exploitative customs observed on the eve of

marriage ceremonies in our country and the social evils

emanating therefrom have not only added to the miseries of the

poor but have put at stake their very existence too. It is

customary in our society that ostentatious display of Jahez and

other dowry articles takes place in front of all the guests with a

view to making it known to them as to what is being given to the

bride by her parents and the parents of the bridegroom. Dowries

are given and now also openly demanded. The lower middle and

poor classes of society are being crushed under the evils of

extravagance and ostentatious displays of wealth. It is

unacceptable as it is against all norms and values known to a

civil society. It must stop. The functions celebrated on the eve of

marriage such as Mayun, Mehndi/Rasm-e-hina, Baraat, etc. and

even the custom of giving large dowries all are of Hindu origin

and have nothing to do with the Islamic concept of marriage.

The Muslims of the subcontinent had offered great sacrifices for

the establishment of an independent State wherein they could

lead their lives in accordance with the teachings of Islam as laid

down in the Holy Quran and the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet

(may peace be upon him). The Constitution of Pakistan contains

sufficient provisions whereby the State is obliged to take steps to

Const.P.23/99

22

& 21/2004

eradicate social evils. The issue in hand needs to be seen in this

larger context.

28.

Item 5 in the Concurrent Legislative List, Fourth

Schedule to the Constitution, speaks about `marriage and

divorce, infants and minors; adoption'. Walima emanates from

marriage and the Federal Government is competent to enact law

on said subject. Indeed, the Federal Government has already

enacted law in the shape of Ordinance No. II of 2000, which is

valid and in force. The Government of the Punjab was not legally

competent to enact the Act No. V of 2003. On this point, Article

143 is clear and it reads as under: -

"143.

If any provision of an Act of a

Provincial Assembly is repugnant to any

provision of an Act of Majlis-e-Shoora

(Parliament),

which

Majlis-e-Shoora

(Parliament) is competent to enact, or to any

provision of any existing law with respect to any

of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent

Legislative List, then the Act of Majlis-e-Shoora

(Parliament), whether passed before or after the

Act of the Provincial Assembly, or, as the case

may be, the existing law, shall prevail and the

Act of the Provincial Assembly shall, to the

extent of the repugnancy, be void."

Perusal of above Article clearly shows that the Act No. V of 2003 enacted by the Punjab Provincial Assembly is inconsistent with the Ordinance No. II of 2000 promulgated by the Federal Government, as such is void. The Ordinance No. II of 2000 holds the field as it was neither withdrawn nor amended nor struck

Const.P.23/99

23

& 21/2004

down by this Court, as such the Punjab Provincial Assembly

enacted the Act No. V of 2003 in violation of the spirit of the

Constitution. Besides, two materially different laws on the same

subject ­ one passed by the Federal Legislature and the other by

a Provincial Legislature, are against the spirit of federation. Since

Federal law has supremacy under Article 143 of the Constitution,

as such the law enacted by the Provincial Assembly, viz., the Act

No. V of 2003 being ultra vires is struck down.

29.

In the light of the above discussion, we decide as

under: -

· Constitution Petitions Nos. 23/1999 and 21/2004 are dismissed;
· C.M.A. No. 1466/2001 in Constitution Petition No. 23/1999 is disposed of in above terms;
· The Act No. V of 2003 passed by the Provincial Assembly of the Punjab is struck down;
· The Ordinance No. II of 2000 holds the field and is applicable throughout Pakistan and the guests be served in terms of sections 4 and 5 ibid quoted above.

CHIEF JUSTICE

JUDGE

ANNOUNCED AT ISLAMABAD This the, 5th day of November, 2004

JUDGE

CHIEF JUSTICE

