IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN (APPELLATE JURISDICTION)
Present: Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar

CIVIL PETITIONS NO.2790 OF 2018
(On appeal from the judgment dated 6.6.2018 passed by the Lahore High Court, Lahore in W.P.No.224129/18)

Hamza Rasheed Khan

...Petitioner (s)

Vs.

Election Appellate Tribunal, Lahore High Court, Lahore and others.

...Respondent (s)

For the Petitioner (s)

: Mr. Kamran Murtaza, Sr. ASC Mr. Munawar Iqbal Duggal, ASC. Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR

For Respondent # 3

: Mr. Azam Nazir Tarar, ASC Mr. Muhammad Omer Riaz, ASC

Date of hearing

: 19.07.2018.

ORDER

We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and counsel for the contesting respondent. Several issues have arisen in this case which include, whether the order of this Court dated 18.7.2013 constitutes a declaration in terms of Article 62(1)(f) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. Pursuant to the aforementioned order, criminal proceedings were launched on the same allegations which have been culminated in an acquittal maintained upto this

2

Court vide Order dated 18.07.2013, whether such

judgment of this Court would washout the earlier

observations purporting to be a declaration in

terms of Article 62(1)(f) of the Constitution. The

third question in this case is, whether a candidate

who has withdrawn his Nomination Papers, can

file a writ petition against the order dismissing the

appeal filed against acceptance of the Nomination

Papers of an opposing candidate.

To consider, inter alia, the aforementioned

questions, leave is granted. Since interpretation of

the Constitution may be involved, notice under

Order XXVII of the CPC may be issued to the

learned Attorney General for Pakistan.

2.

Needless to say that obviously the result

of the election would be subject to the outcome of

these proceedings.

JUDGE

JUDGE

Islamabad, the 19th July, 2018 Not Approved For Reporting Nisar/*

JUDGE

