IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN (APPELLATE JURISDICTION)
Present: Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar

CIVIL PETITION NO.2853 OF 2018
(On appeal from the judgment dated 5.7.2018 passed by the Lahore High Court, Lahore in W.P.No.223699/18)

Sardar Confcius Imam Qasrani

...Petitioner (s)

Vs.

Sardar Mir Badshah Khan Qaisrani & another

...Respondent (s)

For the Petitioner (s) : Mr. M. Raheel Kamran Sheikh, , ASC Mr. Azhar Nawaz Chaudhry, AOR

For Respondents

: N.R.

Date of hearing

: 19.07.2018.

ORDER

As per the report, the private respondent has

not been personally served as he was not available at

his address though copies of the summons were

pasted at his door. There is also a statement that

perhaps he may have been informed telephonically.

Learned counsel for the petitioner states that the

private respondent is deliberately avoiding service.

2.

It is contended by the learned counsel that

the Respondent is not qualified in view of the Order

CP 2853/18

2

of this Court dated 18.07.2013 which constitutes a

declaration in terms of Article 62(1)(f) of the

Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan,

1973, hence, the Respondent is not qualified to

contest the elections. Furthermore, the Respondent

in pursuance to the said Order was prosecuted and

convicted and such conviction still holds the field

though the matter is subjudice before the learned

High Court as the conviction has neither or could

have been suspended.

3.

To consider, inter alia, the aforementioned

questions, leave to appeal is granted. Since

interpretation of the Constitution may be involved,

notice under Order XXVII-A of the CPC may be

issued to the learned Attorney General for Pakistan.

4.

Needless to say that obviously the result of

the election would be subject to the outcome of these

proceedings.

Islamabad, the 19th July, 2018 Not Approved For Reporting Nisar/*

JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE

