IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN (Original Jurisdiction)

PRESENT: MR. JUSTICE MIAN SAQIB NISAR, HCJ MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL AHSAN

SUO MOTU CASE NO.2 OF 2018 AND CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.72 OF 2011

S.M.C.2/2018:

Suo motu action regarding maintaining of Foreign Currency Accounts by Pakistani Citizens without disclosing the same/paying taxes

Const.P.72/2011: Senator Muhammad Ali Durrani Vs. Government of Pakistan and others

In attendance: On Court's Call:

Syed Nayyar Abbas Rizvi, Addl. A.G.P.
Mr. Muhammad Ali Durrani, petitioner (In Const.P.72/2011)
Mr. Tariq Mehmood Bajwa, Governor, State Bank of Pakistan Mr. Tariq Mehmood Pasha, Chairman FBR Mr. Arif Ahmed Khan, Federal Secretary Finance Mr. Bashir Ahmed Memon, D.G. FIA Dr. M. Rizwan, Director Immigration FIA Dr. Usman Anwar, Director FIA Mr. Ali Sher Jakhrani, Director Law FIA Mr. Imran Ahmed Khan, Sr. Joint Secy. M/o Finance Mr. Fazal Mehmood, Director, State Bank of Pakistan Mr. Sanaullah Gondal, Deputy Legal Advisor, Mr. Zahid Khokhar, Member Customs, FBR, Dr. Iftikhar Ahmed, Director Law, FBR, Mr. Mehmood Mandviwala, ASC, Syed Shabbar Zaidi, Sr. Partner, A.F. Ferguson & Co.,
Ch. Aitzaz Ahsan, Sr. ASC Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC

SMC NO.2 OF 2018 ETC.

-: 2 :-

Date of hearing: 12.6.2018
ORDER
By order of the Court dated 26.03.2018, a
Committee of 12 Experts ("Committee") having insight into
the process of accumulation of undeclared foreign movable
and immovable assets by Pakistani citizens was appointed by
this Court. They were tasked with deliberating and
recommending legislative and executive measures for tracing
and retrieving such assets held abroad. The members of the
Committee are named below:
1. Mr. Tariq Bajwa, Governor, State Bank of Pakistan. 2. Mr. Arif Ahmed Khan, Secretary, Finance Division. 3. Mr. Tariq Pasha, Chairman, Federal Board of Revenue. 4. Mr. Khalid Anwer, Sr. ASC. 5. Mr. Mehmood Mandviwalla, Barrister at Law, Senior
Partner Mandviwalla and Zafar. 6. Dr. Ikramul Haq, ASC and Partner Huzaima and Ikram. 7. Mr. Muhammad Waqar Rana, Additional Attorney General. 8. Syed Shabbar Zaidi, Senior Partner, AF Ferguson and Co. 9. Mr. Bashir Ali Muhammad, Business Leader. 10. Mr. Tariq Paracha, Business Leader. 11. Mr. Atif Bajwa, Senior Banker. 12. Mr. Nisar Muhammad Khan, Former Chairman, FBR.

2.

A final report of the Committee was submitted on

13.04.2018 to the Court. During the course of hearing before

us today, the Governor State Bank of Pakistan explained the

Terms of Reference of the Committee. These primarily revolve

around the object expressed in item No.II thereof as follows:

"II. Examine existing legal regime and practices (especially related to foreign exchange and taxation), bilateral treaties and multilateral conventions that can be used to stem the unregulated outflow of foreign exchange from Pakistan, trace undeclared assets held abroad by Pakistani

SMC NO.2 OF 2018 ETC.

-: 3 :-

citizens and retrieve such assets especially the ones generated with proceeds of crime."

3.

The Terms of Reference accordingly invite the

identification of the administrative actions and amendments

in the legislative framework that are necessary for achieving

the purpose and object reproduced above. In the first

instance, the Committee delineated ten factors that have

caused substantial foreign exchange outflows from Pakistan

for creating liquid, movable or immovable assets in foreign

jurisdictions. Briefly these are:

1.

Cash feeding of foreign currency accounts and the

immunity of such transactions under the provision of the

Protection of Economic Reforms Act, 1992 ("PERA") from

scrutiny of the source and the movement of funds deposited

in foreign currency accounts.

2.

Free cash movement of foreign currency of any amount

within and out of Pakistan under, PERA without check or

scrutiny; thereby assisting its smuggling to foreign

jurisdictions.

3.

Misuse of retained foreign exchange by exporters. Laxity in

the regulatory framework for the retained portion of export

proceeds has facilitated its leakage and the accumulation of

undeclared assets abroad.

4.

Under invoicing and over-invoicing in foreign trade

transactions. The weaknesses of the information and

regulatory systems for the valuation of goods/services by

the FBR and the SBP have fostered unauthorized retention

of foreign exchange abroad.

5.

Section 111(4)(a) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001

provided an opportunity for misuse of the immunity to

inward remittances brought through normal banking

channels; as such black money stashed abroad could be

whitened without payment of tax.

6.

The Hundi and Hawala means of foreign currency transfers

have remained available in the market as illegal channels

for transfer of ill-gotten or tax evaded funds.

7.

Short limitation periods in tax laws for initiating legal

action against tax evaders and defaulters have blocked

assessment and recovery of tax on global income and

wealth of citizen.

8.

Scant bilateral tax treaties with other countries for mutual

cooperation and exchange of information have hampered

detection of foreign assets accumulated by citizen.

SMC NO.2 OF 2018 ETC.

-: 4 :-

9.

Lacunae in tax laws and regulations have enabled

avoidance of tax on technical grounds. These lacunae

include vague or insufficient definition of key concepts like

"resident", "non-resident", "foreign company", "trust",

"settlor" and "beneficiary" of a trust.

10. Failure of the present income and wealth tax declaration forms to require disclosure of foreign assets and income of citizen.

4.

Recommendations have been made by the

Committee to deal with the said deficiencies in foreign

exchange regulation and tax collection. The recommendations

note the experience of incentive schemes floated in other

jurisdictions to encourage voluntary disclosure of foreign

assets. These include schemes initiated in the recent past in

Italy, India and Indonesia. It is stated that the Tax Amnesty

Scheme, 2016 offered in Indonesia was highly successful and

the Committee supported its emulation in Pakistan.

5.

The Committee's report has highlighted that

during the financial year 2016-17 a staggering amount,

US$15.253 billion, was transferred abroad by individual

account holders in Pakistan through normal banking

channels. It is also suggested that during the said period a

substantial amount of transfers took place from Pakistan

under unauthorized and undocumented Hundi and Hawala

mechanisms. Clearly, both types of outflows have a huge

impact on the stability of the foreign exchange reserves of the

country and adversely affect the exchange rates of the

Pakistani Rupee. Also as a result, the national economy can

become vulnerable to pressure due to foreign currency

obligations of the State; can suffer undue and disruptive

SMC NO.2 OF 2018 ETC.

-: 5 :-

inflation and can drain the exchequer of substantial amounts

of tax on account of escaped income and wealth.

6.

In the above circumstances, the Committee has

recommended that a scheme for voluntary disclosure of

foreign assets owned by Pakistani citizens be announced by

the Federal Government. This would provide such declarants

with an opportunity to declare and/or transfer their foreign

assets to Pakistan in lieu of payment of tax. In this regard, we

were informed that after our order dated 26.03.2018, the

Federal Government had promulgated the Foreign Assets

(Declaration and Repatriation) Ordinance, 2018. The

Committee has impliedly supported its provisions.

7.

Before us today, several Committee members have

reiterated their support for the voluntary disclosure scheme

announced by the Federal Government. This scheme has in

May, 2018 been re-enacted as the Foreign Assets (Declaration

and Repatriation) Act, 2018. ("Act, 2018"). The significant

feature of the Act, 2018 is the promised immunity from

taxation and penal action in respect of undeclared foreign

assets subject to payment of tax at the following rates:

1. Liquid foreign assets that are not repatriated, 5% of the value of the foreign assets.
2. Immovable assets outside Pakistan, 3% of the value of foreign assets.
3. Liquid assets repatriated and invested in Pakistan government securities, 2% of the value of the foreign assets.
4. Liquid assets repatriated to Pakistan, 2% of the value of the foreign assets.

SMC NO.2 OF 2018 ETC.

-: 6 :-

8.

It is also informed that the government has made

legislative amendments in the relevant laws for curtailing and

regulating the cash feeding of foreign currency accounts by

restricting that privilege to tax filers only. A regulatory check

in cash movement of foreign currency above US$100,000/-

within Pakistan has been imposed. Likewise, immunity from

taxation of inward remittances under Section 111(4)(a) of the

Income Tax Ordinance, 2001 has been limited to a maximum

US$100,000/- per annum. It is acknowledged by the

Governor State Bank and the Members of the Committee

present in Court today that these Suo Motu proceedings have

encouraged the review by the Federal Government of its policy

on the subject leading to the above mentioned legislative and

regulatory changes. With respect to the remaining factors

identified by the Committee for unauthorized foreign currency

outflows from Pakistan, we are informed that no legislative or

regulatory provisions have so far been made by the Federal

Government.

9.

This Court is not an expert in economic, fiscal or

financial matters. It was persuaded to initiate these Suo Motu

proceedings for the grave public interest concerns: firstly,

regarding the declining foreign exchange reserves of the

country, the depreciating exchange rate of the Rupee and the

corresponding inflationary trend of imported essential

commodities; and secondly, by the governmental indifference

towards the unhindered outflows of valuable foreign exchange

from the economic wealth and resources of the country

SMC NO.2 OF 2018 ETC.

-: 7 :-

encouraged by immunities from scrutiny and from taxation

granted to foreign currency transfers abroad that were also

depriving the exchequer of vital tax revenue.

10.

Accordingly, these proceedings have aimed to

draw the attention of the Federal legislative and regulatory

bodies toward the key issues pertaining to the aforementioned

matters of national priority. The fact that the Federal

Government has brought legislation on the subject is a good

start to curtail misuse of privileges granted by the law and

executive regulation. No challenge to the provisions of the

different legislative and regulatory initiatives undertaken in

the matter by the government is presently before the Court.

Also we are not prescient about subtle technicalities of foreign

exchange and balance of payment stabilization nor about

fiscal or other economic matters so as to anticipate

deficiencies in the Federal Government's actions. Likewise, in

the absence of a concrete challenge, the Court is not inclined

to unilaterally sit in academic judgment on the legality or

propriety of the provisions of the scheme of voluntary

disclosure of foreign assets under the Act, 2018.

11.

Having said that, it is observed that any measures

taken by the Federal Government in the public interest to

protect the foreign exchange reserves of the country and to

bring the hitherto undeclared foreign assets within the tax net

are welcomed by the Court. Nevertheless, there are other

deficiencies of the current tax laws and in the regulatory

framework for the holding and transfer of foreign exchange

SMC NO.2 OF 2018 ETC.

-: 8 :-

that promote the accumulation of undeclared foreign assets

and corresponding income. These have been highlighted by

the Committee but remain unaddressed by the Federal

Government. They require careful attention and deliberation

by the concerned authorities. Let the Federal Government,

FBR and the State Bank of Pakistan state their respective

positions about these matters pointed out by the Committee

and indicate if any reform is proposed to correct or remedy

the same.

12.

Relist after one month at the Principal seat of this

Court.

Lahore 12.06.2018
Naseer

Chief Justice Judge Judge

