IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN (ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)
PRESENT: MR. JUSTICE MIAN SAQIB NISAR, HCJ MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL AHSAN
CONSTITUTION PETITIONS NO.74 TO 79 OF 2015, 49 TO 56 OF 2016 AND 2 OF 2018 AND CIVIL MISC. APPLICATIONS NO.4292 OF 2017 AND 162 OF 2018 (Under Article 184 of the Constitution)

Dr. Farhat Javed Siddique Mujahid Ali Khan Zakir Hussain Naseem Muhammad Zakir Ali Siddiqui Muhammad Asif Chaudhry Solicitor Muhammad Dawood Ghaznavi Kiran Zar Tauheed Ahmed Khan Ghazala Kanwal Asim Asif Malik Junaid Bari Dar Owais Fareed Pirzada Shahryar Jahangir Dure Shehwar Hanif Imran Khan and others Impleadment application by Dr. Arif Alvi Impleadment application by Imran Khan Niazi etc.

Government of Pakistan etc.

VERSUS

In Const.P.74/2015 In Const.P.75/2015 In Const.P.76/2015 In Const.P.77/2015 In Const.P.78/2015 In Const.P.79/2015 In Const.P.49/2016 In Const.P.50/2016 In Const.P.51/2016 In Const.P.52/2016 In Const.P.53/2016 In Const.P.54/2016 In Const.P.55/2016 In Const.P.56/2016
In Const.P.2/2018 In C.M.A.4292/2017
In C.M.A.162/2018
...Petitioner(s)
...Respondent(s) (In all cases)

For the petitioner(s):

Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, Sr. ASC Mr. Faisal Fareed Hussain, ASC
(In Const.P.2/2018)

Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR
(In Const.P.74-78/15, 49-56 of 2016)
Solicitor Mr. Daud Ghaznavi, Petitioner in person in Const.P.79/15)

For the respondent(s)/on notice:

Mr. Khalid Jawed Khan, Attorney General for Pakistan. Syed Nayyar Abbas Rizvi, Addl. Attorney General assisted by Barrister Asad Rahim Mr. Zikriya Sheikh, DAG

For ECP:

Mr. Babar Yaqoob Fateh, Secy. ECP Mr. M. Arshad, D.G. Law

Constitution Petition No.74/2015 etc.

-: 2 :-

For NADRA: Dates of hearing:

Mr. Usman Yousaf Mobeen, Chairman. Mr. Zulfiqar Ali, D.G. Projects Mr. Saqib Jamal, Director, Legal Mr. M. Ali D.G. Legal
15.8.2018 (Islamabad) & 17.8.2018 (Lahore)

ORDER MIAN SAQIB NISAR CJ.- The present petitions were filed by,

inter alia, certain Overseas Pakistanis prior to the General Elections held

on 25.07.2018 with the prayer that they (Overseas Pakistanis) be entitled to

vote in the General as well as Local Bodies Elections. Pursuant to the

order dated 29.01.2018 whereby this Court directed the National

Database & Registration Authority (NADRA) with the assistance of the

Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) to develop a system to provide

Overseas Pakistanis with an effective right to vote, an extensive exercise

was undertaken. As a result Overseas Voting Solution (Internet Voting) (I-

voting) was developed. Various presentations were given to this Court to

seek validation of the said system. A third party technical audit of the I-

voting system was also sought and a report was produced in this regard.

While there were certain technical and security apprehensions about

allowing Overseas Pakistanis to vote via the internet, the said report was

generally positive and encouraging. Be that as it may, in order to ensure

that no disruption of any kind was caused to the General Elections 2018,

particularly by an overseas voting mechanism which had never been

tried or tested before, this matter was postponed to after the said

elections. The instant matter has now been revived by this Court.

2.

Learned counsel for the petitioners argued that on account

of the provisions of Section 94 of the Election Act, 2017 (the Act), it is

obligatory for ECP to enable Overseas Pakistanis to exercise their right to

vote. It can discharge such obligation by framing the necessary rules

under Section 239 of the Act. In response, ECP filed its para-wise

comments along with the proposed rules for enabling Overseas

Constitution Petition No.74/2015 etc.

-: 3 :-

Pakistanis to cast their votes through internet. The learned Additional

Attorney General for Pakistan has candidly stated that the right to vote of

Overseas Pakistanis is enshrined in Article 17 of the Constitution of the

Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (the Constitution). It has been spelt out

very clearly in the judgment of this Court reported as Ch. Nasir Iqbal

and others Vs. Federation of Pakistan thr. Secy. Law and others

(PLD 2014 SC 72). According to him, it is only an appropriate

mechanism system and procedure which needs to be put in place by ECP

in exercise of its rule making power to determine how this right to vote

shall be exercised in practical terms.

3.

There are no two opinions about the fact that a citizen's right

to vote is sacrosanct and paramount. Article 17 of the Constitution reads

as under:-

"17. Freedom of association. (1) Every citizen shall have the right to form associations or unions, subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the interest of sovereignty or integrity of Pakistan, public order or morality.
(2) Every citizen, not being in the service of Pakistan, shall have the right to form or be a member of a political party, subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the interest of the sovereignty or integrity of Pakistan and such law shall provide that where the Federal Government declares that any political party has been formed or is operating in a manner prejudicial to the sovereignty or integrity of Pakistan, the Federal Government shall, within fifteen days of such declaration, refer the matter to the Supreme Court whose decision on such reference shall be final.
(3) Every political party shall account for the source of its funds in accordance with law."

Constitution Petition No.74/2015 etc.

-: 4 :-

In Ch. Nasir Iqbal's case (supra) this Court interpreted Article 17 ibid and held that:-

"6. Under Article 17 of the Constitution every citizen has the right to vote to participate in the governance of the country through their chosen representatives...
8. It is to be noted that there is no distinction between the citizens living within Pakistan or outside the country, with regard to the right to vote in terms of the Article 17 of the Constitution...It warrants to mention that the right to vote has not been denied to the overseas Pakistanis, who are as much important as those living inside the country, but only the facilities to vote, which provides the sense of ownership and participation in the governance of the country, has not been extended to them...
9. It must be clarified here that the overseas Pakistanis, as noted hereinabove, enjoy the right to participate in the election process in terms of Article 17 of the Constitution being dignified citizens of the country, though residing outside its territory, as such they cannot be denied the same rights on technical grounds, i.e. logistic arrangements made outside the country for casting their votes.
13. ...Article 17 of the Constitution continues to insist upon the Federal Government to extend the facility of voting to overseas Pakistani in the election of the Parliament as well as Local Bodies."
[Emphasis supplied]
It is pertinent to note that after the aforementioned judgment was passed, no concrete steps were taken to actualize this right to vote for Overseas Pakistanis and enable them to participate in the electoral process while working/residing outside the territorial boundaries of Pakistan. However, subsequently the Act was promulgated on

Constitution Petition No.74/2015 etc.

-: 5 :-

02.10.2017. Section 94 whereof deals with voting by Overseas Pakistanis as follows:-

"94. Voting by Overseas Pakistanis.--(1) The Commission may conduct pilot projects for voting by Overseas Pakistanis in bye-elections to ascertain the technical efficacy, secrecy, security and financial feasibility of such voting and shall share the results with the Government, which shall, within fifteen days from the commencement of a session of a House after the receipt of the report, lay the same before both Houses of Majlis-eShoora (Parliament).
(2) In this section, `Overseas Pakistani' means a citizen of Pakistan under the Pakistan Citizenship Act, 1951 (II of 1951) or holder of National Identity Card for Overseas Pakistanis under the National Database and Registration Authority Ordinance, 2000 (VIII of 2000) who is working or residing abroad permanently or temporarily for not less than six months."
[Emphasis supplied]
The rulemaking power in this regard is vested with the ECP as
contemplated by Section 239 of the Act which is reproduced as under:-

"239. Power to make rules.--(1) The Commission may, by notification in the official Gazette and publication on the website of the Commission, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission shall make the Rules under subsection (1) subject to prior publication and after hearing and deciding objections or suggestions filed within fifteen days of the publication."
[Emphasis supplied]

4.

Overseas Pakistanis have been conferred with the right to

vote as per the interpretation of Article 17 of the Constitution undertaken

Constitution Petition No.74/2015 etc.

-: 6 :-

by this Court in Ch. Nasir Iqbal's case (supra). Thus where the right of Overseas Pakistanis to vote already exists as per the law and is duly recognized, it must necessarily be given due effect. For this reason, the word `may' appearing in Section 94 of the Act is to be read as `shall' and to this end, the only step which the ECP has to take is with regard to adoption of a suitable and effective mechanism and procedure by making appropriate rules under Section 239 of the Act. Accordingly, Section 94 of the Act makes it mandatory for ECP to conduct pilot projects enabling Overseas Pakistanis to vote in the upcoming bye-elections. It is worth mentioning that the phrase `pilot projects' in terms of Section 94 supra does not mean that the votes cast by Overseas Pakistanis through ivoting in the bye-elections, would be treated as mock votes in mock elections, or that the votes cast under such pilot projects would be invalid, rather they are to serve as a sample and if successfully accomplished, or if some technical problems or issues come to fore after removing the same, that this exercise of enabling Overseas Pakistanis to vote may then be replicated on a larger scale, i.e. for future General Elections. Besides, there is a safety net contained in the proviso to Rule 84-C(2) of the proposed rules for overseas voting. This allows ECP to direct exclusion of overseas votes from the final count if it is of the opinion that the technical efficacy, secrecy and security of voting has not been maintained or has for any reason been compromised. This clearly suggests that overseas votes are to be included in the result of the byeelections unless excluded by the ECP for valid reasons. The purpose of such `pilot projects', as has been made clear by Section 94 supra, is to ascertain the technical efficacy, secrecy, security and financial feasibility of such voting after which the ECP is required to prepare a report and submit it to the Government which in turn shall lay it (report) before both

Constitution Petition No.74/2015 etc.

-: 7 :-

the Houses of Parliament within fifteen days from the commencement of

a session of a House after the receipt of the report.

5.

According to the notification dated 17.08.2018 issued by the

ECP regarding the programme of the next bye-elections for 2018, it is

declared that bye-elections for 37 constituencies (both National and Provincial)

are to take place on 14.10.2018. To our mind, undoubtedly these and

subsequent bye-elections (if any) are visualized, and fall within the

meaning of, `bye-elections' as contemplated by Section 94 of the Act for

the pilot projects that ECP has to conduct in order to enable Overseas

Pakistanis to exercise their right to vote. As already observed Overseas

Pakistanis are clearly entitled to vote in the General Elections; they are

therefore equally entitled to vote in bye-elections that are held to fill

vacancies which have or will occur. The system so tried, tested and

perfected can then be deployed in the next General Elections.

6.

To the aforementioned end, Rules 84-A, 84-B and 84-C of

the Election Rules have been framed. According to the Secretary ECP,

they provide for a computerized mechanism, i.e. I-voting, to enable

Overseas Pakistanis to exercise their right to vote. The proposed rules are

reproduced below for ease of reference:-

"84-A. Registration procedure for voting by Overseas Pakistanis.­(1) Where the Commission decides in terms of subsection (1) of section 94 to make arrangements for voting by Overseas Pakistanis living abroad, it shall hold such voting through internet (I-voting).
(2) Only those Overseas Pakistani voters shall be eligible for voting who possess: (a) valid National Identity Card for Overseas Pakistanis (NICOP); (b) valid Machine Readable passport (MRP); and (c) valid E-mail address.

Constitution Petition No.74/2015 etc.
(3) The Overseas Pakistani voter, desirous to cast his vote through I-voting from abroad, during registration time-period as may be fixed by the Commission, shall access the Overseas Voting System through the internet and shall create an account using following credentials: (a) Name; (b) Email address; (c) Generating password of his choice; (d) Mobile Phone Number (optional); and (e) Country of Stay.
(4) A confirmation email of account so created shall be forwarded by the system to the applicant at his given email address and by clicking on the link therein the voter shall be prompted to provide the number of his Machine Readable Passport with its tracking identity and NICOP number along with date of issuance thereof.
(5) Upon completion of proceedings under sub-rule (4), a verification process will be initiated wherein random questions regarding voter's identity information shall be asked by the System and upon correct reply, a message of "Successfully verified" shall be displayed by the system:
Provided that a confirmation email of account verification shall also be forwarded by the system to the applicant.
(6) In case the voter could not correctly reply first set of questions mentioned in sub-rule (5), the system will allow multiple attempts to correctly reply failing which that NICOP number shall be restricted for further attempts:
Provided that upon successful verification, a unique passcode shall be forwarded to the applicant by the system through email before the polling day:
Provided further that on receipt of list, from the Commission, in respect of Overseas Pakistani voters registered as such, the Returning Officer shall take necessary steps to make sure that no overseas voter so registered for overseas voting is allowed to cast his vote at the polling station in person.

-: 8 :-

Constitution Petition No.74/2015 etc.
84-B. Voting procedure for Overseas Pakistanis.­ On polling day, the voter shall log in to the overseas voting system using his username and password and shall avail the voting option from the system for casting his vote in respect of his National Assembly, or, as the case may be, Provincial Assembly Constituency by entering unique passcode:
Provided that by going through designated list of candidates of selected constituency, the voter shall cast his vote by selecting his desired candidate:
Provided further that upon successful submission of vote, a "confirmation" message shall be displayed on the screen.
84-C. Preparation of results in respect of Overseas voting.­(1) After the polling hours are over, the Commission shall generate the Form-45 (Result of the Count) in respect of the constituency by using Reporting Portal of the Overseas Voting System and send the same to the Returning Officer concerned immediately through quickest means as are available for the purpose.
(2) On receipt of Form-45 (Result of the Count) from the Commission under sub-rule (1), the Returning Officer shall include the results contained therein in the consolidated results of the count as furnished by the presiding officer to be prepared by him under section 95 in such manner as the Commission may determine:
Provided that the Commission may direct for noninclusion of the result in respect of the Overseas voting during consolidation of results under section 95, if in its opinion, the technical efficacy, secrecy and security of the voting has not been maintained during the said voting."

-: 9 :-

The ECP and NADRA had given presentations to this Court in the foregoing regard and about third party validation that has also been received from independent experts, regarding the safety, integrity and workability of the system. Based on these representations we prima facie find the mechanism of I-voting to be safe, reliable and effective for being utilized in a pilot project. We are sanguine that the aforesaid proposed

Constitution Petition No.74/2015 etc.

-: 10 :-

rules shall be incorporated in the Election Rules, 2017 to enable

Overseas Pakistanis to exercise their right to vote in the forthcoming bye-

elections. However, we direct the results of the bye-elections and the vote

count of the votes cast by the Overseas Pakistanis through the I-voting

mechanism shall be kept separately and also secret till the time that ECP

is satisfied about the technical efficacy, secrecy and security of the votes

cast by Overseas Pakistanis through the I-voting system. In case such

determination, made on the basis of reasons, is in the negative and the

ECP is not satisfied about the integrity, safety and reliability of the

systems and the votes cast through the same; ECP shall exclude the

segregated votes cast by Overseas Pakistanis from the official result of

the bye-elections in accordance with the proviso to Rule 84-C(2) supra.

This safety feature shall ensure that the elections are founded upon

verified and authenticated votes only.

7.

Before parting we would like to express our appreciation for

the dedicated efforts of NADRA and ECP undertaken for this noble

purpose of great constitutional importance. The petitions are allowed in

the aforementioned terms.

Lahore, the 17th of August, 2018 Not approved for reporting
M. Azhar Malik/*

CHIEF JUSTICE JUDGE JUDGE

